---
layout: post
title: "Building Lisp Command Line Programs Using SBCL"
date: 2012-08-17 18:11
comments: false 
categories: [development, lisp]
keywords: [development, lisp, command line, sbcl, common lisp, quicklisp]
tags: [development, lisp, command line, sbcl, common lisp, quicklisp]
---

One of the challenges I had with Common Lisp initially was using it write
standalone programs. I've gotten a chance now to build several, and I'll
share some of the stuff I've learned. I'm still fairly new to Lisp, and
I'm certain there are a number of drawbacks, but this helped make Lisp more
useful to me and there to start using it more. This does assume you have a
Quicklisp-enabled Common Lisp environment.

The first step is to write in the code to parse command line options. 
Fortunately, There is a Lisp implementation of [Getopt](getopt!) 
available via Quicklisp (or via it's author).

Just as with the C and Python versions of the library (and possibly
others), the Getopt library provides the `getopt` function. The first
thing you probably want to do is define your options. The flag
definition is a little different and is a list of lists; each sublist
has two elements, '(flag argument-specifier. These specifiers are one of:

* `:none` - the option takes no arguments
* `:optional` - the option may take an argument
* `:required` - option requires an argument

Note that if an option requires an argument, and one isn't passed, the 
option is ignored. For example, if we had `'("f" :required)` in our
options, and the program was called with `/path/to/foo -f`, the `f` would
just be ignored and skipped over.

As an example, let's write a program that fetches a web page, similar
to [curl](http://curl.haxx.se/) or
[wget](http://www.gnu.org/software/wget/). We'll use the options `-h`
to print a help message and `-o <filename>` to write the url to a
file. For simplicity's sake, we'll only accept the first argument as
the url to download.

A typical session might look like this:

    <onosendai: ~> $ url-fetch -o macro.lisp http://weitz.de/macros.lisp
    <onosendai: ~> $ ls macros.lisp
    macros.lisp

This is a very basic version to highlight building a CLI, so it
doesn't do anything fancy like change 'weitz.de/macros.lisp' to
'http://weitz.de/macros.lisp' (drakma requires the protocol to be
specified), and the sample code doesn't handle errors well: it will
just dump to the debugger. The topic of error handling is best
described [elsewhere](http://gigamonkeys.com/book/beyond-exception-handling-conditions-and-restarts.html),
and this example program is just the bare minimum to illustrate the
point. With those caveats, let's look at an example `main` function to
handle command line arguments:

```common-lisp
    (defparameter *opts* '(("o" :required)
                           ("h" :none)))
                           
    (defun main ()
      (let ((argv (subeq sb-ext:*posix-argv* 1))
            (write-to-file nil))
        (multiple-value-bind (args opts)
            (getopt:getopt argv *opts*)
          (when (empty-p (car arg))
            (help-message))
          (dolist (opt opts)
            (case (car opt)
              ("h" (help-message))
              ("o" (setf write-to-file (cdr opt)))))
          (fetch-url (car arg) write-to-file))))
```

Setting `argv` to everything after the first argument will skip the
program name; this is just for convenience and isn't strictly
required. It does, however, make the car of the argument list the
first argument passed in. As `getopt` returns multiple values, we'll
want to use `multiple-value-bind` to get at the opts and args. Note
that `args` is a list of strings containing the arguments, and `opts`
is an assoc list. For example, a typical return might be:

```common-lisp
    (multiple-value-bind (args opts)
        (getopt:getopt argv *opts*)
      (format t "args: ~A~%opts: ~A~%" args opts))
    args: (http://weitz.de/macros.lisp)
    opts: ((o . macros.lisp))
```

If no args are passed in, a help message is printed (which also
exits):

```common-lisp
    (defun help-message ()
      (format t "usage: ~A [-h] [-o filename] url~%" (car sb-ext:*posix-argv*))
      (format t "options:~%")
      (format t "    -h            print this help message~%")
      (format t "    -o filename   write url to filename~%~%")
      (sb-ext:quit :unix-status 0))
```

This function is fairly standard, except possibly for the last
line. `sb-ext` is a package containing SBCL's extensions. We saw this
package earlier with `sb-ext:*posix-argv*`, which is simply a list of
all the arguments passed in. In this case, `sb-ext:quit` exits from the
image; the `unix-status` keyword sets the standard UNIX return
value. You can use this to safely terminate the image.

I've elided the actual download components, but assuming they are in
place (using the function names in the main function), we can build
our image. The relevant function is
[`sb-ext:save-lisp-and-die`](http://www.sbcl.org/manual/Saving-a-Core-Image.html),
and it's usage is fairly simple:

```common-lisp
    (sb-ext:save-lisp-and-die (pathname "~/bin/url-fetch")
                              :executable t
                              :toplevel #'url-fetch:main)
```

The `executable` keyword creates a standalone executable when
true, and the `toplevel` keyword specifies the function to run
when the image starts up. 

We can write a utility function to take a list of
[Quicklisp](http://www.quicklisp.org/) packages, an image name, and a
toplevel function and use that to build an image.

```common-lisp
    (defun build-image (dep-list image-name toplevel)
      (dolist (dep dep-list)
        (ql:quickload dep))
      (sb-ext:save-lisp-and-die (pathname image-name)
                                :executable t
                                :toplevel toplevel))
```
                                
This is a fairly rough guide, but it should help to get you
started. The example code is
[available on Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/kisom/url-fetch/).
