---
layout: post
title: "golst: readable Golang source listings"
date: 2013-03-10 15:53
comments: true
categories: [golang, development]
keywords: [golang, literate programming, publishing]
tags: [golang, literate programming, publishing]
---

While working on the book I'm currently writing, I wanted to print out
some source listings to take notes on; often times when writing, I prefer
to remove myself from the computer and go analogue with pad and paper. As
part of the writing process, I wanted to be able to refer to the source
code examples for the book, and therefore needed them with me. Normally
when I print out source code (which admittedly is rarely), I just hit 'print'
from vim.

However, I ran across a post recently by [Luke Gorrie](http://blog.lukego.com/)
titled [Readable Programs](http://blog.lukego.com/blog/2012/10/24/readable-programs/).
I'd seen [CWEB](http://sunburn.stanford.edu/~knuth/cweb.html) before, as well
as Michael Fogus' [Marginalia](http://fogus.github.com/marginalia/), so the
concept wasn't new. However, his inclusion of a sed oneliner for producing
PDF listings triggered some latent ideas in my head. In his oneliner, he
uses `---` as the delimiter for markdown comments. However, I wanted to be
able to take just any Go source file and produce a listing without any
special syntax or weird formatting: if it's good enough for GoDoc, it should
be good enough for whatever tool I use. Particularly, the use of Markdown
as the "literate" formatting syntax stuck with me.

The tool I've written, `golst`, is designed to extract the godoc comments out
of the package. I've put this together in an hour or so, so right now the
`/* */` style comments aren't parsed, only `//` comments that start the line.

For example output, see the listings for the `listing.go` source file:

* [raw source](/downloads/golst/listing.go)
* [markdown listing](/downloads/golst/listing.go.md)
* [HTML listing](/downloads/golst/listing.go.html)
* [LaTeX listing](/downloads/golst/listing.go.ltx)
* [PDF listing](/downloads/golst/listing.go.pdf)
* [TeX listing](/downloads/golst/listing.go.tex)

Source code is up on [Github](https://github.com/gokyle/golst). Alternatively,

        go get github.com/gokyle/golst

